At least in the Rust ecosystem, I have tried many database ORMs and either I am not that smart or the ORMs that exist are either too complicated or too simplistic. I wondered how complicated it would be to make an ORM, so I created one, and it works great, but it did take some time. Here are some details on how it works.

## Requirements
1. I want to generate an initial SQL schema file to initialize the database
1. I want to create patch sql files that will upgrade from one schema version to another
1. I want to generate code for each table that will insert a row into a table, and delete a row from a table

## Lets take a stab at this
This sudocode is in python but my implementation is in Rust
```python
table = Table("User")
table.add_field("username", "string", primary_key=true)
table.add_field("hashed_password", "bytes", min_len=40, unique=false)
table.add_field("notes", "string", nullable=true, unique=false)

table.generate_sql()
```

Will output the following sql
```sql
CREATE TABLE User (
    username TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    hashed_password TEXT NOT NULL CHECK (LENGTH(hashed_password) > 40),
    notes TEXT
);
```

The `add_field` method takes two mandatory parameters: The name and the type. Nullability is off by default so every field will have `NOT NULL` appended unless you turn it off by setting `nullable=true`. Uniqueness is on by default, adding `UNIQUE` to the field unless you turn it off by setting `unique=false`.

For languages with a preprocessor system (like Rust and C), you can run this code at compile time, and it will generate code for you to create User rows at runtime

The following code inserts a new user into the table, The database creation code will generate the `new_with_validation` method with all the details to validate a new user could be inserted into the table (which could be like string lengths or integer maximum validations and things like that). when `insert()` is called, it will first check if someone with that username is in the database.  If not, it will try to insert that data
```python
user = User.new_with_validation("Mark", bytes([0x09, 0x00, 0x09]), "Mark user notes")
user.insert()
```

The above code will fail during the `new_with_validation` without even touching the database because the code knows it is expecting a bytes type for the `hashed_password` field, then it checks its size (3) which is less than the min: 40


## Schema updates
At compile time we can create a new schema version that will generate its own sql code to update the database

```python
schema_v2 = schema_v1.revise()
user_table = schema_v2.get_table("user")
user_table.add_field("new_field_name", "int", default="EMPTY")

schema_v2.generate_sql()
```

The above code will generate the sql code
```sql
ALTER TABLE User
ADD COLUMN new_field_name INT NOT NULL UNIQUE DEFAULT "EMPTY"
```

## Conclusion
Writing your own ORM may take some time investment but I believe it will have a high chance of paying off since you can customize it to your heart's content. I could not imagine the pain it would cause to have to manage schema updates manually. Also it is more fun to write automation code than manually doing the work.

Maybe I will make this open source one day.

