Alpine is great

- The installation size is small
- Not many services run in the background which does not stress the CPU or memory.
- The alpine package manager (apk) is super simple and has all the features I need. Also there is no need to autoremove packages
- It is easy to register a script to run on startup

I have been running alpine on some VMs to host various long-lived services and/or containers for about a year now and it is pretty good but I would not be opposed to finding a new general-purpose go-to operating system. Here are some of the reasons

## musl
Alpine uses musl as its C standard library. I dont have any issues with the concept or implementation of musl, I actually like the idea, but the biggest issue is not all software vendors prioritize it for support.

For example, I wanted to use fluent bit to send logs/metrics to my aggregation service, but it is only available through apk in the testing channel. Also fluent bit does not support musl compilation out of the box, so a bunch of hacks need to be done to make it work as shown in the patch files in the [repo](https://gitlab.alpinelinux.org/alpine/aports/-/tree/master/testing/fluent-bit) for the alpine build of fluent bit.

Another example is I once wanted to compile a rust binary on alpine targeting the target that compiles all of musl into the binary itself so you dont have to worry about what C standard library the host uses `--target=x86_64-unknown-linux-musl`, but since my rust project needed to use openssl, I was having issues with downloading and having it find the openssl cross compilation libraries on the OS, so much so that after a day of trying to get it to work, I had to switch to targeting debian since compilation seemed to just work after downloading the package `libssl-dev`

## ash
Since alpine depends on BusyBox, it uses `ash` as the shell implementation. I understand that it is small and simple, but everyone else uses `bash`. One of the reasons why people like writing bash scripts is they are just text that can usually be run on just about any host rignt? (right?) well I guess not in OSes running ash. You would think the syntax is similar, but it is different enough where you really have to worry about supporting these different shell implementations.

One example is the following code in bash to check for the presence of an environment variable
```bash
if [[ ! -v ENV_VAR ]]; then
  echo "ENV_VAR needs to be set"
  exit 1
fi
```

needs to be written differently in ash
```sh
if [ -z "${ENV_VAR:-}" ]; then
  echo "ENV_VAR needs to be set"
  exit 1
fi
```

😤

## Conclusion
As with most things, choosing an operating system is always a trade-off, there is not one operating system to end all operating systems (alpine gets close), but it is at least exciting to believe one is possible.
