I am creating an public API that frontend engineers in my company will need to consume. Protobuf is great, GraphQL is shiny, a bit over-engineered and will take a while for the engineers at our company to ramp up on, but we decided to use REST because of our engineers' farmiliarity with it.

At a past company I worked at, there was internal tooling to write an API schema using a proprietary markup language, and then it would generate objects in many programming languages so you could instantiate them and simply send them across the network with one function call over REST. Now that I am not at that company anymore I was thinking of open source ways to do this.

OpenAPI seemed like a great candidate. The spec seems like it is climaxing in maturity and on the serface, it seemed like there were a lot of tools to generate client and server code in many languages. Since I am writing the server in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) using [Rocket](https://rocket.rs/), I tried out some Rust server object generation tools, and they just simply did not work, or were too complicated or were too over-engineered or a combination of those three, but I was not willing to take too long to find out. All I was looking for is for simple structs to be generated like CreateUserRequest, and CreateUserResponse.

Since I assumed client generation of an OpenAPI spec to Swift or Javascript would be well supported, I wondered if I could generate an OpenAPI schema from manually created Rust structs for my Rocket project. Luckilly the [utoipa](https://docs.rs/utoipa/latest/utoipa/) crate exists which does exactly that, and it even intelligently parses a project written for the Rocket web framework. API development was going smoothly and I was happy until I started testing some APIs, especially String inputs with length bounds. Here is an example API Request struct that I wrote

```
#[derive(Debug, Serialize, Deserialize, Validate)]
pub struct CreateUserRequest {
    #[validate(length(min = 3, max = 120))]
    pub username: String,
}
```

The struct has a field username which must be between 3 and 120 characters. The generated OpenAPI schema did not specify this though:
```
CreateUserRequest:
    type: object
    required:
    - username
    properties:
    username:
        type: string
        # minLength: 3 <- Missing!
        # maxLength: 120 <- Missing!
```

This is important to have so that the frontend engineers can have an easier time implementing their APIs and will save time for me having to manually figure out what the string length bounds on every API field is during every API version release.

I considered writing a script that takes in the Rust web server code and the generated OpenAPI schema and updates the schema retroactively, but that seemed like a painful and flaky solution. There had to be another way.

Then I realized that JsonSchema supports string lengths, and with its wide adoption there should easilly be a crate that generated a JsonSchema from my Rocket server code so I can give the schema to the frontend engineer. It wont have the API paths or response types specifically like OpenAPI would but would be fully automated other than that for me. Better yet what if I write JsonSchema and have it generate the Rust structs for me.

There are many JsonSchema to Rust struct converters like Like [schema2struct](https://github.com/abdullah-albanna/schema2struct) but like with utoipa, there is no crate that will support string length validation checking. for example this schema

```
{
  "title": "CreateUserRequest",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["username"],
  "properties": {
    "username": {
      "type": "string",
      "minLength": 3,
      "maxLength": 120
    }
  },
  "additionalProperties": false
}
```

will only generate this plain sad struct
```
pub struct CreateUserRequest {
    pub username: String,
}
```

Before I was going to give up and start considering using Protobuf, I was brainstorming how hard it would be to parse a JsonSchema document manually and generate the rust structs. Since I had experience with using Rust ProcMacros in the past, I considered it would not take more than one week to do. In fact it only took 3 working days! Finally I have mostly automated Rest API generation.

For a more full example, here is more useful and robust CreateUserRequest JsonSchema document:
```
{
  "title": "CreateUserRequest",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "username": {
      "type": "string",
      "minLength": 3,
      "maxLength": 120
    },
    "userId": {
      "type": "integer",
      "minimum": 0,
      "maximum": 4294967295
    },
    "tags": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {
        "type": "string",
        "minLength": 1,
        "maxLength": 50
      }
    }
  },
  "required": ["username", "userId", "tags"],
}
```

My generator will generate the struct:

```
use validator::Validate;
use serde::{Deserialize, Serialize};

#[derive(Debug, Validate, Deserialize, Serialize)]
pub struct CreateUserRequest {
    #[validate(length(min = 3, max = 120))]
    pub username: String,

    #[validate(range(min = 0, max = 4_294_967_295))]
    pub user_id: u32,

    #[validate(length(min = 1, max = 50, each))]
    pub tags: Vec<String>,
}
```
