They are tanks! but probably not in the way you expect

The story of why I bought them in the first place starts 500 miles after buying my first road bike which I bought used. Both of those tires got wore down to a weird material that did not seem like it was safe to ride. Going under the assumption that bike tires wear out extremely quickly and I would be buying them frequently, I decided to buy the cheepest tires I could find, some Michelin Dynamic Sports. They cost around $26 each in 2022.

As I continued to ride throughout the spring I would find that I would get a lot of flat tires. In those days I was getting mostly actual punctures compared to pinch flats, so that got me thinking that if I was going to need to replace my tires around 1,000 miles later, let me try a more expensive tire that can have more puncture resistance, so I stocked up on the Gator Hardshells at around $50 a tire in 2023 dollars.

My discovery that tires do not last that long turned out to not be true with my Michelin Dynamic Sports going 3,500 miles as of the writing of this blog with much life left on them still. So for years the Hardshells were just hanging around not being used.

In 2024 for a birthday present to myself I bought a new bike that was at least 25 years newer than the used bike I bought. This bike came with 26 mm [Specialized Turbo Pro T5](https://www.specialized.com/us/en/turbo-pro-t5/p/218297?color=352707-218297)s on aluminum rims with an external rim width of about 23mm. It goes without saying but I was on the honeymoon phase of biking again with my new bike, riding a century every Saturday on those tires.

With 3,500 miles on the Specialized tires and them not showing signs of needing replacing any time soon, I thought about my Hardshells gathering dust and I was wondering how they would feel on my new bike now that I memorized how the Specialized tires felt. I immediately went to my LLM of choice to ask what people thought of gator hardshells in general. It said some things like they have high rolling resistance in practice and in testing, (I estimate being 1 MPH slower at 20 MPH compared to GP5ks). I knew this when buying them since my goals at the time (and still are) not specifically to race my bike, but mostly just to ride comfortable miles.

Some other criticisms of the Hardshells were that they have a harsh ride, which I was suprised by given they have quite a thick tread, they should be able to soak up the bumps but it was saying that since they had to make the tire so hard to resist punctures that it made the tire stiff. Another downside I heard was that they have poor wet grip. I did not hear that criticism until that point, so after hearing these three criticisms I got kind of scared to try them on by bike.

One thing to mention is that I use butile inner tubes, and I dont run tubeless. In short the reason is the Specialized tires do not support tubeless, it is not that adventageous to run tubeless anyway on such narrow tires because of the high pressures recommended to still run, and the unnecessary skill it is to learn how to set tires up tubeless for my use cases. Anyway, I was a little apprehensive to change the tires on my bike since I did not have much success in the past with installing inner tubes without pinching them during instalation and creating holes in the tube, but I did end up installing them anyway.

My first ride out with them I got a pinch flat pretty early on. It was actually the back tire, and pinch flats were usually my front tire. Luckilly I was close to home so I just rode home on the flat so I could fix it comfortably (note to self, dont ride too much on a flat because you may have to re-true your wheel, which is a pain). Anyway it was an expected pinch flat, assumadly because I was riding in the dark and it had been 3 days since installation, pumping the tires up to 90 PSI, so they probably were at 75 when I started riding them, definately pinch flat terretory for the Specialized tires at least.

So actually about a year ago I put around 100 miles on one Hardshell tire on my old bike only installing it on the front wheel. I was not able to feel a massive difference then because that bike is just not a verry good bike in general, weird stuff always happens to it when I ride it so I am always skeptical with the ride feel. Anyway during the first ride after installing it back then I remember getting a pinch flat as well! On the same road, and in the dark too, but in a different location on the road. I thought it was pretty explainable why I got a pinch flat then because I remember the pothole coming up out of nowhere and staring right at as I hit it, it was deep!

But then that got me thinking that these may not be coincidences (more on this later). Anyway, last week I rode the Hardshells on my new bike for 50 miles in the daytime this time, and on a route that I am really familliar with, the Lake Washington loop. Immediately I could tell something was different, it felt good somehow. I was trying to put my finger on it, Do I like a harsh ride? Do I like having less grip in the wet? (It was dry though). After 20 miles I figured it out! I was not swerving out of the way of undesirable pavement features as much. This then got me thinking what that meant, so I intentionally started going over gratess and small potholes to see how it felt, and it turns out it felt much smoother than the Specialized tires. I was trying to think of if I had low pressure in the Hardshells, so I stopped on the side of the road and squeezed the tire with my fingers, they were as hard as rocks, at 100 PSI still as I remembered pumping them up to earlier in the day. What a pleasent supprise.

Even the Specialized tires at 90 PSI did not feel to different than when they are at 50 PSI, just with massively more pinch flat potential, but these Hardshells felt smoother than the Specializeds even compared to the Specializeds 50 PSI! After my 50 mile ride was done with much less butt pain from the smooth ride, I was taking my bike in the house and as I was taking my bike up a stair, my back tire bounced on the edge of the stair a little and the bike felt weird, much different than I was used to. It felt like I was bouncing a thick, heavy rubber ball on the ground, much different than the Specialized tires which would give a harsh vibration in the same senereo.

So lets see, what were the other downsides? They are slower than most other tires? This was possibly true since I almost could feel them not go as fast for the same power input, but there are so many variables that could have influenced that, also with only having rode the tires once I dont think I can comment on the speed yet. One thing I was thinking of though is if the Hardshells were indeed softer, what benifits could that have other than comfort? The answer is they could actually make me faster! I would not need to slow down to stear around potholes and manhole covers, not need to break as often when going over rough terrain and also the comfort could lower my percieved exertion throughout the ride making me have more confidence to keep going.

The other downside that was mentioned was the wet grip. While I am not too experienced at testing the limit of my tires' grip, I still dont plan on riding my bike in the rain any time soon. This past year I have become a fairweather biker, getting on my indoor trainer on raint days, so I am not sure how impactfull a downside this is.

To sum things up, Gator Hardshells are good actually because they are tanks when it comes to going over rough road and potholes (compared to Specialized Turbo Pro T5 tires on an aluminum bike with aluminum wheels with 23mm external width). This point was contrary to other people's experiences suprisingly. This may actually be a downside such that i may get more pinch flats by being able to ride on over more dangerous road features. They are probably slow but I only care about putting miles on my bike, not racing. They may have bad wet grip as other people say but I dont ride my bike in the rain so that will not matter. I am now on a new honeymoon phase of bike riding because of the majorly positive experience switching from the Specialized tires, and I do not plan on switching back any time soon. YMMV tho obv.

