Here are some of my controversial opinions of bike components as of May 2025

- carbon rim < hydro disc < metal rim < mechanical disc
- electronic shifting < cable index shifting = friction shifting
- tubeless < butyl < TPU
- Press fit BB < Threaded BB (T47/BSA)
- 172.5 < 170 < 165mm
- 2x < 3x < 1x
- 40cm < 38cm < 36cm
- round bottles < aero bottls (whose cage can accommodate round bottles too)
- high stem < low stem
- no bento box
- no saddle bag
- maybe a hydro backpack for endurance rides
- C02 < Hand pump
- GP5ks < Gator Hardshells

## Break type
I have only used mechanical rim breaks and hydraulic disc breaks on a bike. It is kind of cool to have the immediate and strong stopping power of the hydro discs, but to be honest I am not a bike racer and in my full year of riding 3,500 miles on them, I dont feel like I have ever used them to their full potential. Also the whole ethos of a road bike does not seem right to have some toxic fluid in a tube inside a tube in your bike, then you have to dispose of it, and bleasing breaks is not the easiest thing to do in the world. The reason why I put metal rim above hydro disc is because disc breaks still experience break fade when they get hot, they still perform less well in the wet, actually worse compared to steel rims in my experience. I put mechanical disc at the top because you can fit wider tires  without having to change your rim break calipers, the only limit to how wide your tires can be is the frame. 

## Shifting
I have only used cable index shifting on a bike. Electronic shifting has the issue that the code and mechanical schematics are not open source, I am afraid of vendor lock-in and bugs in the code and hacks and bluetooth jamming. Also I have known many people who have weird things go on with the shifter batteries, either not holding a charge or just stopping in the middle of a ride. If I was just getting into biking right now and dont have the experience of changing cables already and having the experience of re-indexing both the front and the rear derailler, maybe you can just skip the cables, but I have no issue messing around with cables. Also I dont race so I dont have to worry about a millisecond of shift time lost loosing me a race. For friction shifting, I dont see an issue with it, you can just dial in the index yourself, it is a lot slower and more of a pain, but I dont expect it to get on my nerves at all.

## Tire air holder mechanism
Tubeless takes a lot of skill to figure out though it has gotten easier over the years. Yes you can run lower pressures but I dont have any issues with the feeling of my Gator Hardshells at 90 PSI. I have never tried for example 32mm tubeless tires though so I may be persuaded afterwards. TPU is a lot lighter than butyl and it is as light if not lighter than tubeless. TPU has a measurable amount less rolling resistance than butyl, but probably a slight more than tubeless. Yes you can corner faster with high volume low pressure tires but I never had a problem with cornering a little slower since I dont race. Pinch flats are a thing with tubes but it should be fine as long as you pump to 90 PSI before every ride. I have only used TPU inner tubes for a week at this point so I will update you later on my experience.

## BB standards
People say press fit is harder to build tolerances for which leads to weird BB noises. It is easier to manufacture threads into a metal insert in your bike frame. Press fit can be lighter which can be faster but I dont worry about these such marginal gains. I also like the idea that I need less tools to service a threaded BB at home than a press fit one. I have not thought about the difference between T47 and BSA though, T47 is just a larger hole.

## Crank length
I have two bikes, one with 170 and one with 172.5.  I feel like I can feel the difference and the 170s are just more pleasant to use, I feel like there is less effort mentally I am putting into the pedals. Also I remember when I got my new bike last year with the 172.5 cranks I had a little hip ache for a couple weeks, that could have been from the sharper hip angle I had to get used to or it could have been another aspect of the different bike fit. Also you have less chance of pedal strikes with shorter cranks, but I am not a racer so I dont usually need to cornner that aggressively.

## Chainring count
So one of my bikes is an old 3x and one is a 2x. when I started on the 3x it was really intuitive because when you are on flat roads you stay in the middle chainring, when it gets steep, your first shift is to shift to the small chainring and that should give you a sufficient jump to start the hill, and the opposite for the large chainring. For the 2x on my new bike, I get really confused all the time when I should be in what chainring and I end up shifting slower because of that mental effort. Also the gap between the small and large ring is a lot so shifting the chainring for example to the big ring, I almost always have to immediately follow it up with shifting 3 easier cassette gears, and the opposite for the other direction too which is too much physical effort in my opinion too.

I really like the concept of 1x because as a minimalist, I get it. Also I very rarely feel like I need a gear inbetween some gears I have now, so with the larger gear jumps for the 1x I dont know if it will be too large or not, but I think even if I do feel like I dont have the right gear, all the other simplification and thoughtless shifting will more than overcome that hardship

## Handlebar width
One of my bikes has a 38 with angled in hoods, and the other bike has a 42 with straight hoods. I had no issues with the 38 for all my 2 years of riding it. I do have issues with the 42 though, it is way too wide, I feel like I am driving a tractor

## Arrow bottles?
So my riding style has my knees going in a small bit from the width of my feet and sometimes my calf brushed against a round bottle (also the same reason why I dont like bento boxes). I have not used aero bottle cages yet but I feel like I wont brush as much on them. Also they are more arrow. I am fine with arrow bottle cages as long as I can put a round bottle in the same cage in a pinch though, because round bottles are not going away

## Handlebar height
When I got my bike it came with some spacers. I did not have any back pain for the first 1000 miles so I figured I would put those spacers on the top instead and lower my bars. I did not feel much difference after I did. People say even though you are getting lower you are less arrow but that probably only really matters if your hands are close together like in a TT position so your low hands do not break wind on the side of your pelvis compared to your fat belly, maybe it depends on your body proportions?

## Bento box?
So I tried a bento box but my knees would always hit it and it scraped my frame quite a bit and it gives a high center of gravity. No thank you.

## Saddle bag?
I used a saddle bag for like 6 months but then it got ripped so the strap broke and water started getting in which was not nice if I am counting on it to keep my phone dry. I probably had bad luck but I never had issues tying my tools together and putting it in my back pocket, I always had room

## Hydro backpack
I would consider this for endurance rides. It seems to be having a comeback in fassion for long non-team rides like Unbound. I would consider testing one out for century+ rides since I have to stop for water alot if not

## Tire Inflation on the road
People like C02 because it is light but I never had an issue with the heavyness or the dimensions or the feeling of a hand pump in my back pocket. I also dont mind using the pump to pump my tires up, in my opinion it is actually easier to use.

## Tire models
I like Gator Hardshells, I have written a previous blog post about that, but long story short I dont mind the higher rolling resistance and they are really soft over rough road. GP5ks are currently $190 for a pair, and they were like $140 just a year ago because I think I remember checking. Gator Hardshells are only $100 for a pair. The low rolling resistance of the GP5ks are not worth the money for me as a non-racer.