I have been using drip wax for almost 2 years now, and I will never go back to oil based lubes. It has made me wonder what the new cleaning frequency should be for drip wax. For oil lubes it is pretty obvious when it needs to be unclipped and doused in degreaser, usually when it gets all gunked up with various dirt and sand particle, because they can ruin your chain life because they grind.

For wax based lube, there is two main types of maintenance people usually do. One is wiping down the chain while it is on the bike to get surface wax off, and another is to introduce the chain to hot water. In the last 4000 miles I used my chain, I have not introduced hot water to my chain nor have I wiped the chain off, I just put more drip wax on it when it started to make more noise. The guy in the youtube channel `Cycling in Southern California` has a chain that has 14,000 miles on it and it is not past .5 wear yet. All that time he has just used squirt drip wax and has been wiping it down every ride, and re-applying when necessary.

One day when I was riding with my friend, he had a strong desire to swap bikes for a few miles. I like new things, so I relented. One of the biggest differences I felt while riding his bike was that when pedaling, I did not feel the chain vibrating throughout my legs, it was something I had never thought could be eliminated, so then it got me thinking how I could eliminate it on my bike. I know I dont hot wax my chain and his chain was hot waxed, but that and his tires being 60 PSI 28mms were the only major differences I could tell.

I then wondered if my chain would be smoother if I deep cleaned my chain. Inspecting my chain, the outside links were slightly black colored because they were coated in discolored wax, which seemed fine to me. One of the interesting things I saw though was some thin wax sheet coming out the top of the connection between a roller and a side plate, seeming to be one of the paths of least resistance wax can take after getting stuck deep in a roller. Is it ok for it to stay there? Maybe it can be re-used and go back into lubricating a roller? When does used wax become not useful anymore? (a good question I wonder to those who re-dip their dirty chain in hot wax and never swap out the wax in the melter pot)

One other thing I noticed is that when I tried to bunch up my chain like how it comes in a package, there was a lot of resistance for the chain rollers to roll in the chain. I wondered if this contributed to a loss in efficiency, not just the vibration I was feeling. I felt my friend's chain who hot waxes his chain and his chain felt to have a significant amount of resistance too, but about half of what my chain did, so if hot waxing is purported to be the most efficient thing you can do for your chain and there is resistance to rolling on his, maybe resistance on mine is not an issue?

So I was feeling curious that day and took my chain off and poured boiling water into a glass jar with the chain in it and shook it up for a couple minutes. Almost immediately the water turned black and I could barely see the chain in the jar. I poured the water out and repeated the process 2 more times. Each time the water got less black. It was kind of cool to see black stuff coming out of the chain. Once the chain dried, I felt the resistance of the rollers, and they had virtually no resistance, it was a really cool feeling. I figured for sure the chain will feel smoother.

After a few days of the new drip wax curing on the chain, I took my bike out for a ride, and guess what was different about the vibration feeling? Nothing! Now I dont have a bike efficiency rig that can measure the power going in through the cranks and compare that to the power the back wheel is outputting to compare the efficiency of the cleaning, but one thing I can definitely tell is the chain is a little more sparkly looking.

From now on, I am going to try to wipe down the chain after every ride and see if that keeps the chain roller resistance low, even though I am not sure that is useful at all. I dont really care about the look of the chain though whether it is sparkly or shaded in black wax, so I dont even know why I am doing it.

In conclusion, I am not sure there is much to conclude. After 4,000 miles on the chain without cleaning it, it has not worn to close to .5 yet, so I guess not cleaning it is not massively damaging the chain. It is great to know that chains last a long time now adays using wax based lubes, so maybe people should not be worrying about to clean or not to clean because it does not matter to non-racers like me? Anyway hopefully this blog post did not waste your time coming to a meaningless conclusion.