src/bike_blog/7.md, before:


Maxing out your carb intake makes you a better cyclist and reduces fatigue during and after your ride. I always aim for 90g per hour. Gels should not be expensive. Make your own!

The cheapest carb source per gram I have found is granulated sugar but it does not dissolve well in water on its own. If you introduce some heat, it creates a gel that is stable for a long time.

- Cost: $0.15 per 100 g carbs ($7 per 10lb bag sugar)
- Prep time: 30s
- Cook time: 2 min

Ingredients:

- 2 cups granulated sugar (400g)

Process:

1. Put the sugar into a pan on the stove
1. Add 1 cup water
1. Stir the mixture a little
1. Turn the burner on high
1. Keep stirring gently with a spoon until the spoon no longer attracts visible granules of sugar (see the pictures below) about 1.5 minutes
1. Leave the gel out to cool or put it in a refrigeratoe
1. Put in some sort of container. I currently use a corn syrup bottle (holds all 400g) and put it in my back pocket



![start](../assets/7/start.jpg)
![intermediate](../assets/7/intermediate.jpg)
![done](../assets/7/done.jpg)

Commit message:

Added that there is no water left over and you can add mixins you want

src/bike_blog/7.md, after:


Maxing out your carb intake makes you a better cyclist and reduces fatigue during and after your ride. I always aim for 90g per hour. Gels should not be expensive. Make your own!

The cheapest carb source per gram I have found is granulated sugar, but that is hard to eat as it is. In order to melt it down, you can add water and some heat to form it into a gel. The water content has just about all evaporated off at the end and you are left with only liquid sugar.

This is the base for most gels so you can add whatever mixins you want

- Cost: $0.15 per 100 g carbs ($7 per 10lb bag sugar)
- Prep time: 30s
- Cook time: 2 min

Ingredients:

- 2 cups granulated sugar (400g)

Process:

1. Put the sugar into a pan on the stove
1. Add 1 cup water
1. Stir the mixture a little
1. Turn the burner on high
1. Keep stirring gently with a spoon until the spoon no longer attracts visible granules of sugar (see the pictures below) about 1.5 minutes
1. Leave the gel out to cool or put it in a refrigeratoe
1. Put in some sort of container. I currently use a corn syrup bottle (holds all 400g) and put it in my back pocket



![start](../assets/7/start.jpg)
![intermediate](../assets/7/intermediate.jpg)
![done](../assets/7/done.jpg)
