src/bike_blog/8.md, before:


Tires on a road bike are important, and fascinating. Understanding them can be hard though. Here is a guide to understand them at a high level. Hopefully this takes you from "There is a lot I have questions about" to "I want to geek out more on the details"

The two major aspects of tires is the size, and rubber compound

tl;dr - skip to the conclusion

## Size
One of the easier things to get your head around is size, there are mostly 2 things to worry about

1. Width
1. Diameter (Bead Seat Diameter)

#### Width
FYI this is kind of a long but fascinating and important section. Here it goes.

For a long time, like up until around the year 2000, people were running tires that had 21 and 23 mm width. The conventional wisdom was that if the tire was thinner it would slice through the air more, be lighter and touch the ground less (have less rolling resistance) all making the bike faster. They would pump the tire to as high a pressure as possible (100-120 PSI) to reduce the contact patch and therefore rolling resistance. Later it turned out all of these were either false or negligible.

For the rolling resistance part, it turns out that if you have the pressure too high like 100 PSI, it makes the tire bounce up and down on the pavement contributing to loss of energy that could be turned into more force making the wheel spin. When people started lowering the tire pressure though, they saw something sad happen. 

They saw flat tires. When a tube in a tire gets caught between a rock and a hard place (a rock being like a pothole, the hard place being the rim of your wheel) they both grab onto the inner tube and as the wheel rotates, The tube gets stretched in those two concentrated areas where the two sides of the rim are and essentially creates a rip in the inner tube, making the inner tube loose air and your tire no longer able to pretty much do its job

In order to reduce the pressure in the tire without having the above drawbacks, the industry presented two solutions. One was start widening the tires. If the tires were wider, there is more sidewall for the tire to bend before it bottoms out on your rim getting pinch flats, and also there is more air in the tire for deformation to occur before bottoming out. Maybe 20 years ago people started increasing the standard size to 25 mm, and maybe 10 years ago they started increasing to 28 mm. For 25 mm tires, I am able to get the pressure as low as 80 PSI before getting a pinch flat. Scientific rolling resistance tests though estimate that a 25 PSI tire with my weight and my wheel's internal rim width of 19mm, the optimal pressure I should be running for the best rolling resistance on average quality roads is 68 PSI. People now are running 68 PSI and even much lower, but how are they doing it without pinch flats? They are actually not even using a tube

Car tires do not use tubes anymore, so why do bikes need tubes? Well first of all, car tires are mounted on the rim with a big hydraulic press, which we do not have the luxary of using if we need to replace a tire on the side of the road. The way the industry came up with doing this is to put a little magic liquid in the tire when you put it on the rim for the first time that flows through a spot where air is leaking out of a tire and turns into tire rubber like compound. This has the added benefit of increasing puncture protection by sealing itself for example if a thin wire goes through the tire and comes out. They are able to run lower pressures without pinch flats because when the rim latches onto the tire when hitting a pothole, the tire will not tear because it is more beefy than an inner tube. So why are people still using tubes? there are a lot of reasons but I will save that for a different blog article.

Ok so tires with a larger width that can be run with the optimal pressure without a tube have less rolling resistance. But they are heavier and they do not slice through the wind as good as thinner tires. These two things are true but tests have shown that the aerodynamic losses because of this are almost negligible. A good way to think how big your body is compared to the tire. If you make an almost imperceptible movement with your body to make yourself more aerodynamic, you are probably getting more aerodynamic than the difference between a 25 and a 28 mm tire change.

Larger tires are more heavy than thinner tires, but this is by around 30g per tire, so 60 grams over the whole system of your weight + the bike weight (~6-10 kg) this will probably not be a major consideration especially given the worse rolling resistance of a thinner tire.

As of now, the optimal road bike tire size is somewhere between 28mm and 32mm depending on the rider weight, tire pressure, internal and external rim width on the front tire, rim depth and much more. Some are even saying 40mm tires are the fastest, but there is currently a lack of race optimized 40mm tires to test on, and even if there were, many road bike frames are not able to fit 40mm because the tire will not spin freely because it hits the frame by being so big.

#### Diameter
Diameter has mostly been the only standard since the mod 1980s at the 700C standard. This is more specifically a diameter of 622mm starting where the tire touches the wheel (called the bead). There are probably better rim diameters depending on the situation, but for the most part, it was better to standardize on and achieve the economies of scale of manufactureing rims and tires than to specialize for specific situations. This has been standardized for so long that people do not even talk now a days what wheel diameter people are running because like 99.9 percent of road bikes are on 622mm.

There are rumblings now adays of making wheels even larger in diameter because it is more efficient at higher speeds and for larger riders, but we can save this debate for some other time. 

A technical caviat to diameter is that we are talking about bead seat diameter. Depending on what width tire you have, the effective wheel+tire diameter may be larger or smaller. Larger tires resemble the cross sectional shape of a circle which means if the width gets bigger, the height gets bigger. People have said this is slightly perceptable actually and can impact the gear ratios people choose on their bikes.

## Rubber Compound

So the rubber compound can be radically changed to change the characteristics of how a tire feels and performs quite significantly, so much so that it is commonly cited as the second if not the first most impactful upgrade to change what the bike does (not even the frame is that important). You may be thinking that since car tires have massively varrying tread patterns that bike tires would too, this actually does not really do much to a bike tire, most of them are simply as slick as possible

There are 4 major categories manufactures compete in. They are as follows

- Time trial tires
- Reasonably livable fast tires (Someone help me come up with a better name)
- All season tires
- Maximally puncture protected tires

Here is a table to break these down by performance characteristics (abbreviated from above for readability) (5 is better (cheaper, faster, longer lasting) than 1)

| | TT | RLFT | AS | PP |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Price Range | 1-2 | 1-2 | 3 | 3 |
| Puncture Protection | 1 | 2 | 3-4 | 5 |
| Rolling Resistance | 5 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| Tread Life | 1 | 3 | 3-5 | 3-5 |
| Wet Grip | 1-5 | 1-5 | 4-5 | 1-5 |
| Weight | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 |
| Comfort | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 |

#### Time Trial Tires
These are made specifically to be as fast as possible like on time trials where riders are going really fast. All other considerations are secondary. They carry the highest price tag because reducing rolling resistance is really hard to reduce. Tread life is on the order of a couple hundered miles to 1,000 miles Wet grip varies but many time trial events are not done in wet roads. Weight should ideally be low but it does not matter too much since time trials are usually flat where climbing weight does not matter too much. Puncture protection does not matter too much because time trial race organizers usually go through the course before the race and do a quick check to make sure there are not any obvious things that can puncture tires on the road. Also it is worse to loose a race by 1 second than to loose a race because you got a puncture.

#### Reasonably Livable Fast Tires
These tires are made to be as fast as possible but they should last around 2,000 to 4,000 miles before needing replacing, They should have excellent rolling resistance, but they cant be as fast as the TT tires since they have to last longer but they can get pretty close. Wet grip and weight vary, Puncture protection is not usually the best but is usually slightly measurably better than TT tires. Price is still really high because it is hard to optimize for rolling resistance still and even adding in the requirement they should last a little longer is tough.

#### All Season Tires
These tires are optimized for being a balance of just about everything. Since they will be used on roads where rain has washed tons of random stuff into the road, they need to have not bad puncture protection, and they need to be able go around corners without making you slip and fall. Price range is usually not too expensive because it is not that engineering intensive to strike a good balance. Tread life should be pretty good since running over things and not being able to always see the smoothest places to ride on the road can wear the tires down. Rolling resistance cannot be the best considering these considerations

#### Maximally Puncture Protected Tires
The main selling point obviously is not making you stop on the side of the road to change your inner tube because it was punctured. All other things are secondary. A good example of this is the Gator Hardshell, as of now it is the second most puncture proof road tire as tested by bicyclerollingresistance.com. These stop just short of putting a metal strip in the tire to make sure it does not puncture. The tire will not be the lightest because of this. It is probably not that hard to make a tire maximally puncture resistant and the market is not as cutthroat for this as is the market for low rolling  resistance tires so price is generally not too expensive. If the tire is being made bomb proof, it is usually going to be done by making the tread thick so tread wear should at least not be short. Wet grip and weight can vary.

An example of maximally puncture protected tire is the Gator Hardshell. In a previous blog I did a medium term review on it. The summary is that it is really noticeable how slow it is when going down a hill, but I never got a puncture so far and it was not the most expensive tire.

#### Other Categories
There may be other unoficial categories of tires but they are not that useful to talk about. For example there is a segment of tire that is really cheep, you can just about bet money (ha) that they will be terrible in all the other above rated categories

An example of this tire is the Michelin DynamicSport. I rode these for 4,000 miles and they are just about worn through. They were the first tires I ever bought. They were not the worst tires for comfort, not the worst for tread wear, but I would always get punctures with this tire, I probably got 10 punctures during this time, not including pinch flats. The rolling resistance was bad too. I would not recommend this tire at all. There are tires as cheep as this that are better in just about every way that for example actually fit in the All Season tire category.

## Conclusion
- Pretty much all road bike tires fit on all road bike rims. 
- Set up your tires tubeless to get an optimal tire pressure (and therefore optimal rolling resistance) without worrying about pinch flats if you are ready for a challenge of messing with the sealant goop.
- Use a tire between the widths of 28 and 32 mm. If you want an extra comfy ride, you can get a 40 mm tire but make sure it will spin freely on your frame. Just dont expect to win races with it
- There are 4 main categories of tires mostly based on their tire compound. Get the best tire for your desired outcome
- Dont get cheep tires. Most of them have many downsides. In your short life, it is not worth saving money on bad tires

Yeah I know I need to add citations and links

Commit message:

I wish I had this when I started cycling

src/bike_blog/8.md, after:


Tires on a road bike are important, and fascinating. Understanding them can be hard though. Here is a guide to understand them at a high level. Hopefully this takes you from "There are probably some things I still dont fully understand" to "I want to geek out more on the details". This would have saved me so much time if I read this blog post when I started cycling.

The two major aspects of tires is the size, and rubber compound

tl;dr - skip to the conclusion

## Size
One of the easier things to get your head around is size, there are mostly 2 things to worry about

1. Width
1. Diameter (Bead Seat Diameter)

#### Width
FYI this is kind of a long but fascinating and important section. Here it goes.

For a long time, like up until around the year 2000, people were running tires that had 21 and 23 mm width. The conventional wisdom was that if the tire was thinner it would slice through the air more, be lighter and touch the ground less (have less rolling resistance) all making the bike faster. They would pump the tire to as high a pressure as possible (100-120 PSI) to reduce the contact patch and therefore rolling resistance. Later it turned out all of these were either false or negligible.

For the rolling resistance part, it turns out that if you have the pressure too high like 100 PSI, it makes the tire bounce up and down on the pavement contributing to loss of energy that could be turned into more force making the wheel spin. When people started lowering the tire pressure though, they saw something sad happen. 

They saw flat tires. When a tube in a tire gets caught between a rock and a hard place (a rock being like a pothole, the hard place being the rim of your wheel) they both grab onto the inner tube and as the wheel rotates, The tube gets stretched in those two concentrated areas where the two sides of the rim are and essentially creates a rip in the inner tube, making the inner tube loose air and your tire no longer able to pretty much do its job

In order to reduce the pressure in the tire without having the above drawbacks, the industry presented two solutions. One was start widening the tires. If the tires were wider, there is more sidewall for the tire to bend before it bottoms out on your rim getting pinch flats, and also there is more air in the tire for deformation to occur before bottoming out. Maybe 20 years ago people started increasing the standard size to 25 mm, and maybe 10 years ago they started increasing to 28 mm. For 25 mm tires, I am able to get the pressure as low as 80 PSI before getting a pinch flat. Scientific rolling resistance tests though estimate that a 25 PSI tire with my weight and my wheel's internal rim width of 19mm, the optimal pressure I should be running for the best rolling resistance on average quality roads is 68 PSI. People now are running 68 PSI and even much lower, but how are they doing it without pinch flats? They are actually not even using a tube

Car tires do not use tubes anymore, so why do bikes need tubes? Well first of all, car tires are mounted on the rim with a big hydraulic press, which we do not have the luxary of using if we need to replace a tire on the side of the road. The way the industry came up with doing this is to put a little magic liquid in the tire when you put it on the rim for the first time that flows through a spot where air is leaking out of a tire and turns into tire rubber like compound. This has the added benefit of increasing puncture protection by sealing itself for example if a thin wire goes through the tire and comes out. They are able to run lower pressures without pinch flats because when the rim latches onto the tire when hitting a pothole, the tire will not tear because it is more beefy than an inner tube. So why are people still using tubes? there are a lot of reasons but I will save that for a different blog article.

Ok so tires with a larger width that can be run with the optimal pressure without a tube have less rolling resistance. But they are heavier and they do not slice through the wind as good as thinner tires. These two things are true but tests have shown that the aerodynamic losses because of this are almost negligible. A good way to think how big your body is compared to the tire. If you make an almost imperceptible movement with your body to make yourself more aerodynamic, you are probably getting more aerodynamic than the difference between a 25 and a 28 mm tire change.

Larger tires are more heavy than thinner tires, but this is by around 30g per tire, so 60 grams over the whole system of your weight + the bike weight (~6-10 kg) this will probably not be a major consideration especially given the worse rolling resistance of a thinner tire.

As of now, the optimal road bike tire size is somewhere between 28mm and 32mm depending on the rider weight, tire pressure, internal and external rim width on the front tire, rim depth and much more. Some are even saying 40mm tires are the fastest, but there is currently a lack of race optimized 40mm tires to test on, and even if there were, many road bike frames are not able to fit 40mm because the tire will not spin freely because it hits the frame by being so big.

#### Diameter
Diameter has mostly been the only standard since the mod 1980s at the 700C standard. This is more specifically a diameter of 622mm starting where the tire touches the wheel (called the bead). There are probably better rim diameters depending on the situation, but for the most part, it was better to standardize on and achieve the economies of scale of manufactureing rims and tires than to specialize for specific situations. This has been standardized for so long that people do not even talk now a days what wheel diameter people are running because like 99.9 percent of road bikes are on 622mm.

There are rumblings now adays of making wheels even larger in diameter because it is more efficient at higher speeds and for larger riders, but we can save this debate for some other time. 

A technical caviat to diameter is that we are talking about bead seat diameter. Depending on what width tire you have, the effective wheel+tire diameter may be larger or smaller. Larger tires resemble the cross sectional shape of a circle which means if the width gets bigger, the height gets bigger. People have said this is slightly perceptable actually and can impact the gear ratios people choose on their bikes.

## Rubber Compound

So the rubber compound can be radically changed to change the characteristics of how a tire feels and performs quite significantly, so much so that it is commonly cited as the second if not the first most impactful upgrade to change what the bike does (not even the frame is that important). You may be thinking that since car tires have massively varrying tread patterns that bike tires would too, this actually does not really do much to a bike tire, most of them are simply as slick as possible

There are 4 major categories manufactures compete in. They are as follows

- Time trial tires
- Reasonably livable fast tires (Someone help me come up with a better name)
- All season tires
- Maximally puncture protected tires

Here is a table to break these down by performance characteristics (abbreviated from above for readability) (5 is better (cheaper, faster, longer lasting) than 1)

| | TT | RLFT | AS | PP |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Price Range | 1-2 | 1-2 | 3 | 3 |
| Puncture Protection | 1 | 2 | 3-4 | 5 |
| Rolling Resistance | 5 | 4 | 3 | 2 |
| Tread Life | 1 | 3 | 3-5 | 3-5 |
| Wet Grip | 1-5 | 1-5 | 4-5 | 1-5 |
| Weight | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 |
| Comfort | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 | 1-5 |

#### Time Trial Tires
These are made specifically to be as fast as possible like on time trials where riders are going really fast. All other considerations are secondary. They carry the highest price tag because reducing rolling resistance is really hard to reduce. Tread life is on the order of a couple hundered miles to 1,000 miles Wet grip varies but many time trial events are not done in wet roads. Weight should ideally be low but it does not matter too much since time trials are usually flat where climbing weight does not matter too much. Puncture protection does not matter too much because time trial race organizers usually go through the course before the race and do a quick check to make sure there are not any obvious things that can puncture tires on the road. Also it is worse to loose a race by 1 second than to loose a race because you got a puncture.

#### Reasonably Livable Fast Tires
These tires are made to be as fast as possible but they should last around 2,000 to 4,000 miles before needing replacing, They should have excellent rolling resistance, but they cant be as fast as the TT tires since they have to last longer but they can get pretty close. Wet grip and weight vary, Puncture protection is not usually the best but is usually slightly measurably better than TT tires. Price is still really high because it is hard to optimize for rolling resistance still and even adding in the requirement they should last a little longer is tough.

#### All Season Tires
These tires are optimized for being a balance of just about everything. Since they will be used on roads where rain has washed tons of random stuff into the road, they need to have not bad puncture protection, and they need to be able go around corners without making you slip and fall. Price range is usually not too expensive because it is not that engineering intensive to strike a good balance. Tread life should be pretty good since running over things and not being able to always see the smoothest places to ride on the road can wear the tires down. Rolling resistance cannot be the best considering these considerations

#### Maximally Puncture Protected Tires
The main selling point obviously is not making you stop on the side of the road to change your inner tube because it was punctured. All other things are secondary. A good example of this is the Gator Hardshell, as of now it is the second most puncture proof road tire as tested by bicyclerollingresistance.com. These stop just short of putting a metal strip in the tire to make sure it does not puncture. The tire will not be the lightest because of this. It is probably not that hard to make a tire maximally puncture resistant and the market is not as cutthroat for this as is the market for low rolling  resistance tires so price is generally not too expensive. If the tire is being made bomb proof, it is usually going to be done by making the tread thick so tread wear should at least not be short. Wet grip and weight can vary.

An example of maximally puncture protected tire is the Gator Hardshell. In a previous blog I did a medium term review on it. The summary is that it is really noticeable how slow it is when going down a hill, but I never got a puncture so far and it was not the most expensive tire.

#### Other Categories
There may be other unoficial categories of tires but they are not that useful to talk about. For example there is a segment of tire that is really cheep, you can just about bet money (ha) that they will be terrible in all the other above rated categories

An example of this tire is the Michelin DynamicSport. I rode these for 4,000 miles and they are just about worn through. They were the first tires I ever bought. They were not the worst tires for comfort, not the worst for tread wear, but I would always get punctures with this tire, I probably got 10 punctures during this time, not including pinch flats. The rolling resistance was bad too. I would not recommend this tire at all. There are tires as cheep as this that are better in just about every way that for example actually fit in the All Season tire category.

## Conclusion
- Pretty much all road bike tires fit on all road bike rims. 
- Set up your tires tubeless to get an optimal tire pressure (and therefore optimal rolling resistance) without worrying about pinch flats if you are ready for a challenge of messing with the sealant goop.
- Use a tire between the widths of 28 and 32 mm. If you want an extra comfy ride, you can get a 40 mm tire but make sure it will spin freely on your frame. Just dont expect to win races with it
- There are 4 main categories of tires mostly based on their tire compound. Get the best tire for your desired outcome
- Dont get cheep tires. Most of them have many downsides. In your short life, it is not worth saving money on bad tires

Yeah I know I need to add citations and links
